.TH PIDGIN-STOP 1 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pidgin-stop \- Stop running experiments gracefully
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pidgin stop
[\fIEXPERIMENT_ID\fR]
.br
.B pidgin stop
.BR \-\-all
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBstop\fR command gracefully terminates running experiments. It ensures
that any in-progress conversations are completed and data is properly saved
before shutting down the experiment daemon.
.PP
You can stop a specific experiment by providing its ID (full or shortened)
or name, or stop all running experiments at once with the --all flag.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I EXPERIMENT_ID
The experiment to stop. Can be:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
Full experiment ID (e.g., experiment_7a8b9c0d)
.IP \(bu 3
Shortened ID (e.g., 7a8b9c0d or even 7a8b)
.IP \(bu 3
Experiment name (e.g., "bright-horizon")
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-all
Stop all running experiments. This option cannot be used with an experiment ID.
.SH BEHAVIOR
When stopping an experiment:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
The stop signal is sent to the experiment daemon
.IP 2. 3
Any conversations currently processing a turn are allowed to complete
.IP 3. 3
Pending conversations are cancelled
.IP 4. 3
All JSONL event files are properly closed
.IP 5. 3
The experiment status is updated to "stopped"
.IP 6. 3
Database import is triggered for completed conversations
.RE
.PP
The command will wait for graceful shutdown (up to 30 seconds) before
forcing termination if necessary.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Stop a specific experiment by ID:
.RS
.nf
pidgin stop experiment_7a8b9c0d
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stop using shortened ID:
.RS
.nf
pidgin stop 7a8b
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stop by experiment name:
.RS
.nf
pidgin stop bright-horizon
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stop all running experiments:
.RS
.nf
pidgin stop --all
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successfully stopped the experiment(s)
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred (experiment not found, already stopped, etc.)
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ./pidgin_output/experiments/*/manifest.json
Updated with stop timestamp and final status
.TP
.I ./pidgin_output/experiments/*/daemon.pid
PID file removed after successful stop
.SH NOTES
Stopping an experiment does not delete any data. All conversations completed
before the stop are preserved and can be analyzed. The experiment can be
analyzed using the auto-generated Jupyter notebook or DuckDB after stopping.
.PP
If an experiment appears to be hung, you can force-terminate it by manually
killing the process using the PID from the daemon.pid file, though this is
not recommended as it may result in incomplete data.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pidgin (1),
.BR pidgin-run (1),
.BR pidgin-monitor (1),
.BR pidgin-info (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors