.TH PIDGIN 1 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pidgin \- AI conversation research tool for studying emergent communication patterns
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pidgin
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBPidgin\fR enables controlled experiments between AI agents to discover how they
develop communication patterns, convergence behaviors, and linguistic adaptations.
It serves as an AI linguistic observatory, recording and analyzing the evolution
of machine-to-machine communication.
.PP
Pidgin focuses on being a lightweight conversation orchestrator that records
interactions into structured data formats (JSONL and DuckDB) for later analysis.
It intentionally avoids heavy ML dependencies to remain fast and portable.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B run
Run conversations between AI agents. This is the primary command for conducting
experiments. Supports single conversations or multi-conversation experiments.
.TP
.B stop
Stop running experiments gracefully. Can stop a specific experiment by ID/name
or all running experiments with --all.
.TP
.B monitor
System-wide health monitor showing all active experiments, progress, convergence
warnings, and completion estimates. Updates live every 2 seconds.
.TP
.B branch
Branch from an existing conversation at a specific turn to explore alternate
conversation paths.
.TP
.B models
List all available AI models with their providers and context windows.
.TP
.B config
Create a configuration file with example settings at ~/.config/pidgin/pidgin.yaml.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Show help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Start a simple conversation between Claude and GPT-4:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a claude -b gpt-4 -t 20
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run an experiment with multiple conversations:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a haiku -b gpt-4o-mini -r 10 -t 50 --name "compression-study"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use a YAML specification file:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run experiment.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Monitor all running experiments:
.RS
.nf
pidgin monitor
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stop a specific experiment:
.RS
.nf
pidgin stop experiment_abc123de
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stop all running experiments:
.RS
.nf
pidgin stop --all
.fi
.RE
.PP
View available models:
.RS
.nf
pidgin models
.fi
.RE
.PP
Branch from an existing conversation:
.RS
.nf
pidgin branch conv_12345678 --turn 15
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.pidgin/
User configuration directory containing API keys and settings.
.TP
.I ./.pidgin/
Project-specific configuration directory (takes precedence over user config).
.TP
.I ./pidgin_output/
Default output directory for experiments, conversations, and analysis results.
Contains subdirectories for experiments, each with JSONL event logs and DuckDB
databases.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
API key for Claude models (required for Claude conversations).
.TP
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI models including GPT-4 (required for OpenAI conversations).
.TP
.B GOOGLE_API_KEY
API key for Google models like Gemini (required for Google conversations).
.TP
.B XAI_API_KEY
API key for xAI models like Grok (required for xAI conversations).
.TP
.B PIDGIN_OUTPUT_DIR
Override the default output directory (default: ./pidgin_output).
.TP
.B PIDGIN_LOG_LEVEL
Set logging level: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR (default: INFO).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
General error
.TP
.B 2
Command line usage error
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by user (Ctrl+C)
.SH NOTES
Pidgin stores all conversation data in JSONL format for maximum portability
and transparency. Each event is recorded with full context, allowing complete
reconstruction of conversations. Data is automatically imported into DuckDB
for efficient analysis after experiments complete.
.PP
The tool is designed to be stateless - all experiment state is derived from
the JSONL event logs, making it robust against interruptions and allowing
experiments to be resumed or analyzed later.
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation at: https://github.com/nicholas-lange/pidgin
.PP
API documentation: https://github.com/nicholas-lange/pidgin/tree/main/docs/api
.PP
YAML specification format: https://github.com/nicholas-lange/pidgin/blob/main/docs/yaml-specs.md
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/nicholas-lange/pidgin/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors