.TH PIDGIN-INFO 1 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pidgin-info \- Display information about models, experiments, and conversations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pidgin info
\fISUBCOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBinfo\fR command provides detailed information about various aspects of
the Pidgin system, including available models, experiments, and specific
conversations.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B models
List all available AI models with their capabilities and characteristics.
.TP
.B experiments
Show all experiments (running, completed, and failed) with summary statistics.
.TP
.B conversation \fIID\fR
Display detailed information about a specific conversation including metrics,
messages, and convergence data.
.TP
.B commands
List all available Pidgin commands with brief descriptions.
.SH MODELS SUBCOMMAND
.B pidgin info models
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
Shows available models organized by provider.
.TP
.BR \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
Filter by provider (openai, anthropic, google, xai, local).
.TP
.BR \-\-format " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Output format: table (default), list, or json.
.PP
Example output:
.RS
.nf
OpenAI Models:
  gpt-4         Premium reasoning model      (128k context)
  gpt-4o        Multimodal model            (128k context)
  gpt-4o-mini   Fast multimodal model       (128k context)

Anthropic Models:
  claude        Claude 3.5 Sonnet           (200k context)
  opus          Claude 3 Opus               (200k context)
  haiku         Claude 3.5 Haiku            (200k context)
.fi
.RE
.SH EXPERIMENTS SUBCOMMAND
.B pidgin info experiments
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
Lists all experiments with summary information.
.TP
.BR \-\-status " " \fISTATUS\fR
Filter by status: running, completed, failed, stopped.
.TP
.BR \-\-recent " " \fIN\fR
Show only the N most recent experiments.
.TP
.BR \-\-detailed
Include detailed metrics for each experiment.
.PP
Example output:
.RS
.nf
Active Experiments:
  bright-horizon (experiment_abc123)
    Status: running (45% complete)
    Started: 2 hours ago
    Conversations: 23/50

Completed Experiments:
  neural-bridge (experiment_def456)
    Status: completed
    Duration: 3h 24m
    Conversations: 100
    Avg convergence: 0.87
.fi
.RE
.SH CONVERSATION SUBCOMMAND
.B pidgin info conversation
\fICONVERSATION_ID\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
Shows detailed information about a specific conversation.
.TP
.BR \-\-metrics
Include all calculated metrics.
.TP
.BR \-\-messages " " \fIN\fR
Show last N messages (default: 5).
.TP
.BR \-\-export " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Export conversation data (json, markdown, csv).
.PP
Information displayed:
.IP \(bu 3
Conversation metadata (ID, experiment, models, duration)
.IP \(bu 3
Turn-by-turn convergence scores
.IP \(bu 3
Final metrics summary
.IP \(bu 3
Recent messages
.IP \(bu 3
Token usage statistics
.SH COMMANDS SUBCOMMAND
.B pidgin info commands
.PP
Lists all available Pidgin commands with brief descriptions.
Useful for quick reference without viewing full help.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
List all available models:
.RS
.nf
pidgin info models
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show only Anthropic models:
.RS
.nf
pidgin info models --provider anthropic
.fi
.RE
.PP
List recent experiments:
.RS
.nf
pidgin info experiments --recent 10
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show running experiments only:
.RS
.nf
pidgin info experiments --status running
.fi
.RE
.PP
View conversation details:
.RS
.nf
pidgin info conversation conv_abc123
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export conversation to markdown:
.RS
.nf
pidgin info conversation conv_abc123 --export markdown > conv.md
.fi
.RE
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.TP
.B table
Human-readable table format (default)
.TP
.B list
Simple list format
.TP
.B json
Machine-readable JSON format
.TP
.B csv
Comma-separated values (conversations only)
.TP
.B markdown
Markdown format (conversations only)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pidgin (1),
.BR pidgin-run (1),
.BR pidgin-monitor (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors