.TH PIDGIN-BRANCH 1 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pidgin-branch \- Branch from existing conversation states
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pidgin branch
\fICONVERSATION_ID\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBbranch\fR command creates a new conversation that continues from a
specific point in an existing conversation. This allows exploring alternate
conversation paths by changing prompts, models, or parameters while preserving
the conversation history up to the branch point.
.PP
Branching is useful for:
.IP \(bu 3
Testing how different prompts affect conversation direction
.IP \(bu 3
Comparing different model responses to the same context
.IP \(bu 3
Exploring "what if" scenarios in conversation development
.IP \(bu 3
Creating conversation trees for analysis
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I CONVERSATION_ID
The conversation to branch from. Can be the full ID or a unique prefix.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-turn " " \fIN\fR
Turn number to branch from (required).
The new conversation will include all messages up to and including this turn.
.TP
.BR \-\-prompt " " \fITEXT\fR
Custom prompt to inject at the branch point.
If not provided, continues with normal message flow.
.TP
.BR \-\-agent\-a " " \fIMODEL\fR
Override agent A model for the branched conversation.
Default: use the same model as the original.
.TP
.BR \-\-agent\-b " " \fIMODEL\fR
Override agent B model for the branched conversation.
Default: use the same model as the original.
.TP
.BR \-\-max\-turns " " \fIN\fR
Maximum turns for the branched conversation.
Default: same as original conversation.
.TP
.BR \-\-temperature " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Set temperature for both agents in the branch.
.TP
.BR \-\-temp\-a " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Set temperature for agent A only.
.TP
.BR \-\-temp\-b " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Set temperature for agent B only.
.TP
.BR \-\-speaker " " \fIAGENT\fR
Which agent speaks next (agent-a or agent-b).
Default: follows natural turn order.
.TP
.BR \-\-name " " \fINAME\fR
Name for the branched conversation.
Default: auto-generated based on original name.
.TP
.BR \-\-tail
Show live conversation output (same as run --tail).
.SH BEHAVIOR
When branching:
.RS
.IP 1. 3
The original conversation's history up to the branch turn is copied
.IP 2. 3
System prompts and configurations are preserved unless overridden
.IP 3. 3
A new conversation ID is generated with branch metadata
.IP 4. 3
The branch continues from the specified turn with new parameters
.IP 5. 3
Both conversations remain independent and can be analyzed separately
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Branch from turn 10 of a conversation:
.RS
.nf
pidgin branch conv_abc123 --turn 10
.fi
.RE
.PP
Branch with a custom prompt injection:
.RS
.nf
pidgin branch conv_abc123 --turn 15 \\
    --prompt "Let's explore a different perspective on this topic"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Branch with different models:
.RS
.nf
pidgin branch conv_abc123 --turn 20 \\
    --agent-a gpt-4 --agent-b claude
.fi
.RE
.PP
Branch with modified temperature:
.RS
.nf
pidgin branch conv_abc123 --turn 10 \\
    --temperature 1.2 --name "high-temp-branch"
.fi
.RE
.SH OUTPUT
Branched conversations are saved with metadata indicating:
.IP \(bu 3
Original conversation ID
.IP \(bu 3
Branch point (turn number)
.IP \(bu 3
Timestamp of branch creation
.IP \(bu 3
Any parameter overrides
.PP
The branch appears as a new conversation in experiments and can be analyzed
independently or compared with the original.
.SH NOTES
Branching does not modify the original conversation. All branches are
independent conversations that happen to share initial history.
.PP
Multiple branches can be created from the same conversation at different
turns or even the same turn with different parameters.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pidgin (1),
.BR pidgin-run (1),
.BR pidgin-info (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors