.TH PIDGIN-MONITOR 1 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pidgin-monitor \- System-wide health monitor for running experiments
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pidgin monitor
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmonitor\fR command provides a real-time, system-wide view of all active
experiments. It displays a live dashboard that updates every 2 seconds, showing
experiment progress, system load, convergence warnings, and completion estimates.
.PP
The monitor reads directly from JSONL event files, avoiding database locks and
ensuring it doesn't interfere with running experiments. It provides a read-only
view of system activity.
.SH DISPLAY
The monitor shows:
.SS Experiment Overview
.IP \(bu 3
Experiment name and ID
.IP \(bu 3
Start time and duration
.IP \(bu 3
Number of conversations (completed/total)
.IP \(bu 3
Overall progress percentage
.IP \(bu 3
Estimated time to completion
.SS Active Conversations
.IP \(bu 3
Conversation IDs currently processing
.IP \(bu 3
Current turn number
.IP \(bu 3
Agent models in use
.IP \(bu 3
Latest convergence scores
.SS System Metrics
.IP \(bu 3
Total active conversations
.IP \(bu 3
System load indicator
.IP \(bu 3
Token usage rates
.IP \(bu 3
API response times
.SS Convergence Warnings
.IP \(bu 3
High convergence alerts (>0.95)
.IP \(bu 3
Stalled conversations
.IP \(bu 3
Repetition patterns detected
.SH CONTROLS
.TP
.B Ctrl+C
Exit the monitor
.TP
.B Space
Pause/resume updates
.TP
.B R
Force refresh
.SH FEATURES
.SS Lock-Free Operation
The monitor reads JSONL files directly without acquiring locks, ensuring it
never blocks or slows down running experiments.
.SS Auto-Discovery
Automatically discovers all experiments in the output directory without requiring
explicit configuration.
.SS Resource Efficient
Minimal CPU and memory usage through efficient file reading and caching
strategies.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Start the system monitor:
.RS
.nf
pidgin monitor
.fi
.RE
.PP
The monitor will display something like:
.RS
.nf
╭─ Pidgin System Monitor ────────────────────╮
│ 3 Active Experiments │ Load: ████░░░░ 45%  │
╰────────────────────────────────────────────╯

▶ radiant-lake (experiment_a1b2c3d4)
  Started: 10:45 AM │ Duration: 0:23:45
  Progress: ████████░░ 78% (39/50)
  ETA: ~6 minutes
  
  Active: conv_12345678 (turn 18/20)
         Models: claude ↔ gpt-4
         Convergence: 0.89 ↑

▶ crystal-peak (experiment_e5f6g7h8)
  Started: 11:02 AM │ Duration: 0:06:30
  Progress: ██░░░░░░░░ 20% (2/10)
  ETA: ~26 minutes
  
⚠ High Convergence: conv_87654321 (0.97)

[Updated: 11:08:45 AM]
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PIDGIN_MONITOR_INTERVAL
Update interval in seconds (default: 2)
.TP
.B PIDGIN_OUTPUT_DIR
Directory to monitor (default: ./pidgin_output)
.SH NOTES
The monitor is designed to be left running continuously during experiments.
It has negligible performance impact and provides valuable real-time insight
into experiment progress.
.PP
For detailed analysis of completed experiments, analyze the auto-generated 
Jupyter notebooks in the experiment directories.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pidgin (1),
.BR pidgin-run (1),
.BR pidgin-stop (1),
.BR pidgin-info (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors