.TH PIDGIN-RUN 1 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pidgin-run \- Run conversations between AI agents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pidgin run
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fISPEC_FILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBrun\fR command initiates conversations between two AI agents, either as
single conversations or multi-conversation experiments. It supports both
command-line configuration and YAML specification files.
.PP
Conversations are recorded in real-time to JSONL files, with automatic database
import upon completion. The command displays conversation progress by default,
with options for quiet operation or detailed monitoring.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I SPEC_FILE
Optional YAML specification file defining the experiment configuration.
If provided, command-line options are ignored in favor of the spec file.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Agent Selection
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-agent\-a " " \fIMODEL\fR
First agent model (required unless using spec file).
Examples: claude, gpt-4, gemini, local:llama3.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-agent\-b " " \fIMODEL\fR
Second agent model (required unless using spec file).
.SS Conversation Parameters
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-prompt " " \fITEXT\fR
Initial prompt to start the conversation.
Default: "Let's have a fascinating discussion."
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-turns " " \fIN\fR
Maximum number of turns (message exchanges) per conversation.
Default: 20
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-repetitions " " \fIN\fR
Number of conversations to run (creates an experiment).
Default: 1 (single conversation)
.SS Temperature Settings
.TP
.BR \-\-temperature " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Set temperature for both agents (0.0-2.0).
.TP
.BR \-\-temp\-a " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Set temperature for agent A only.
.TP
.BR \-\-temp\-b " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Set temperature for agent B only.
.SS Convergence Control
.TP
.BR \-\-convergence\-threshold " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Threshold for convergence detection (0.0-1.0).
Default: 0.95
.TP
.BR \-\-convergence\-action " " \fIACTION\fR
Action when convergence threshold is reached.
Choices: stop, continue, notify.
Default: stop
.TP
.BR \-\-convergence\-profile " " \fIPROFILE\fR
Predefined convergence profile.
Choices: research, exploratory, fun.
.SS Advanced Options
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dimension " " \fISPEC\fR
Use dimensional prompt generation.
Format: perspective:topic:style
Example: peers:philosophy:analytical
.TP
.BR \-\-first\-speaker " " \fIMODEL\fR
Which agent speaks first (agent-a or agent-b).
Default: agent-a
.TP
.BR \-\-awareness " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set system prompt awareness level for both agents.
Choices: none, basic, enhanced, full.
.TP
.BR \-\-awareness\-a " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set awareness level for agent A only.
.TP
.BR \-\-awareness\-b " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set awareness level for agent B only.
.TP
.BR \-\-prompt\-tag " " \fITAG\fR
Load prompt from CLAUDE.md by HTML comment tag.
.SS Display Options
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIMODE\fR
Output display mode.
Choices: default, minimal, none, markdown, json.
Default: default
.TP
.BR \-\-show\-system\-prompts
Display system prompts before starting.
.TP
.BR \-\-meditation
Increase pause between messages (3-10 seconds).
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Minimal output (same as --output minimal).
.TP
.BR \-\-tail
For experiments, show live tail view of all conversations.
.SS Experiment Options
.TP
.BR \-\-name " " \fINAME\fR
Custom name for the experiment (auto-generated if not provided).
.TP
.BR \-\-max\-parallel " " \fIN\fR
Maximum parallel conversations (default: 20).
.TP
.BR \-\-choose\-names
Interactively choose agent names.
.TP
.BR \-\-notify
Send desktop notification when complete.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Simple conversation between Claude and GPT-4:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a claude -b gpt-4 -t 30
.fi
.RE
.PP
Experiment with 10 conversations:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a haiku -b gpt-4o-mini -r 10 -t 50 --name "efficiency-test"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Using dimensional prompts:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a claude -b gemini -d teacher:mathematics:patient
.fi
.RE
.PP
Custom temperatures and convergence:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a gpt-4 -b gpt-4 --temp-a 0.3 --temp-b 0.9 \\
    --convergence-threshold 0.8 --convergence-action notify
.fi
.RE
.PP
From YAML specification:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run experiment.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
With custom awareness levels:
.RS
.nf
pidgin run -a claude -b llama3 --awareness-a full --awareness-b none
.fi
.RE
.SH YAML SPECIFICATION
When using a YAML file, all command-line options are ignored. See
\fBpidgin-yaml\fR(5) for the specification format.
.SH OUTPUT
Conversations are saved to:
.RS
.nf
./pidgin_output/experiments/<experiment_id>/
    manifest.json           # Experiment metadata
    conv_<id>_events.jsonl  # Event logs per conversation
    experiment.db           # DuckDB database (post-import)
    analysis.ipynb          # Auto-generated Jupyter notebook
.fi
.RE
.SH NOTES
Temperature affects response randomness (0=deterministic, 2=very random).
Different models have different optimal temperature ranges.
.PP
Convergence detection monitors vocabulary overlap, structural similarity,
and other metrics to determine when agents have reached a stable communication
pattern.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pidgin (1),
.BR pidgin-yaml (5),
.BR pidgin-metrics (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors