.TH PIDGIN-YAML 5 "July 2025" "pidgin 0.1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
pidgin-yaml \- YAML specification format for Pidgin experiments
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B experiment.yaml
.SH DESCRIPTION
Pidgin experiments can be configured using YAML files that specify all
parameters for running conversations. This allows for reproducible experiments
and complex configurations that would be unwieldy on the command line.
.SH FORMAT
The YAML file uses the following structure:
.SH BASIC STRUCTURE
.RS
.nf
# Experiment metadata
name: my-experiment          # Optional: auto-generated if not provided
description: |               # Optional: experiment description
  Multi-line description
  of the experiment

# Agent configuration
agents:
  agent_a: claude           # Model for agent A
  agent_b: gpt-4           # Model for agent B

# Core parameters
initial_prompt: "Let's discuss philosophy"
max_turns: 50
num_conversations: 10       # Number of repetitions

# Optional parameters
temperature: 0.7            # Temperature for both agents
temperatures:               # Or set per-agent
  agent_a: 0.3
  agent_b: 0.9

# System prompt awareness
awareness: enhanced         # For both agents
awareness_levels:           # Or set per-agent
  agent_a: full
  agent_b: basic

# Convergence settings
convergence:
  threshold: 0.85
  action: stop              # stop, continue, or notify
  
# Execution settings  
max_parallel: 10            # Parallel conversation limit
output_mode: default        # Display mode
.fi
.RE
.SH FIELDS
.SS Required Fields
.TP
.B agents
Object containing agent_a and agent_b model specifications.
.TP
.B max_turns
Maximum number of turns (exchanges) per conversation.
.TP
.B num_conversations
Number of conversations to run in the experiment.
.SS Optional Fields
.TP
.B name
Experiment name. Auto-generated if not provided.
.TP
.B description
Free-form description of the experiment's purpose.
.TP
.B initial_prompt
Starting prompt for conversations. Can use multi-line YAML syntax.
Default: "I'm excited to have this conversation with you."
.TP
.B temperature / temperatures
Model temperature settings (0.0-2.0). Can be set globally or per-agent.
.TP
.B awareness / awareness_levels
System prompt awareness (none, basic, enhanced, full).
.TP
.B convergence
Object with threshold (0.0-1.0) and action settings.
.TP
.B dimensional_prompt
Dimensional prompt specification (perspective:topic:style).
.TP
.B custom_instructions
Per-agent custom system prompt additions.
.TP
.B max_parallel
Maximum concurrent conversations (default: 20).
.TP
.B output_mode
Display mode: default, minimal, none, markdown, json.
.TP
.B meditation_mode
Enable longer pauses between messages.
.TP
.B tags
List of tags for experiment categorization.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Minimal Configuration
.RS
.nf
agents:
  agent_a: haiku
  agent_b: gpt-4o-mini
max_turns: 20
num_conversations: 5
.fi
.RE
.SS Research Configuration
.RS
.nf
name: compression-dynamics
description: |
  Studying how language models compress communication
  over extended interactions
  
agents:
  agent_a: claude
  agent_b: gpt-4

initial_prompt: |
  You're about to engage in a freeform conversation.
  Be yourself and explore ideas naturally.

max_turns: 100
num_conversations: 50

temperatures:
  agent_a: 0.3
  agent_b: 0.3

convergence:
  threshold: 0.95
  action: stop

awareness_levels:
  agent_a: full
  agent_b: full

max_parallel: 10
output_mode: minimal

tags:
  - compression
  - long-form
  - matched-temperature
.fi
.RE
.SS Dimensional Prompt Example
.RS
.nf
agents:
  agent_a: opus
  agent_b: gemini

dimensional_prompt:
  perspective: teachers
  topic: quantum_physics
  style: socratic

max_turns: 30
num_conversations: 10
.fi
.RE
.SS Custom Instructions
.RS
.nf
agents:
  agent_a: gpt-4
  agent_b: claude

custom_instructions:
  agent_a: |
    You have a background in poetry and tend to use
    metaphorical language in your responses.
  agent_b: |
    You are highly analytical and prefer precise,
    technical language.

max_turns: 40
num_conversations: 20
.fi
.RE
.SH VALIDATION
YAML files are validated before execution. Common errors include:
.IP \(bu 3
Missing required fields (agents, max_turns, num_conversations)
.IP \(bu 3
Invalid model names
.IP \(bu 3
Out-of-range values (e.g., temperature > 2.0)
.IP \(bu 3
Conflicting settings (e.g., both temperature and temperatures)
.SH NOTES
YAML files support comments (lines starting with #) for documentation.
Use meaningful experiment names and descriptions for better organization.
.PP
File paths in YAML are relative to the YAML file's location, not the
current working directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pidgin (1),
.BR pidgin-run (1),
.BR yaml (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Nicholas Lange and contributors